feat: add `generate-spec` command (#2937)
Redocly/redocly-cli: packages/cli/src/commands/generate-spec/README.md

| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--type`           | Target description type. Only `openapi` is supported.                                                 |
| `--traffic-format` | Traffic input format (`auto`, `har`, `kong`, `nginx-json`, `apache-json`, `ndjson`).                  |
| `--server`         | Server URL the traffic was captured against. Scopes which requests are considered and sets `servers`. |
| `--title`          | Title for the generated description.                                                                  |
| `--with-ai`        | Refine the inferred description with an AI provider.                                                  |
| `--ai-provider`    | `claude`, `codex`, or `cursor` (default `claude`).                                                    |
| `--ai-model`       | Model passed to the selected provider.                                                                |
| `--ai-concurrency` | Number of operations refined in parallel (default `4`).                                               |

> | `-o, --output`     | Write the result to a file instead of stdout.                                                         |

Reviewer: Should we also mentioned in README the limitation of producing only OAS v3.1.0 description?

Author: Added — the intro now states "The command generates OpenAPI 3.2 descriptions only." (The command moved from 3.1 to 3.2 output based on the other review threads.)

# generate-spec [experimental]

Infer an OpenAPI description from recorded HTTP traffic, optionally refined with AI.

Traffic alone can only ever produce a _hypothesis_ about an API's real shape: types are coarse, every observed property looks required, and there are no descriptions, enums, or formats.
`generate-spec` first builds that hypothesis deterministically, then can hand it to an AI provider together with real sample exchanges to narrow it toward the true definition.

## Usage

```bash
# Deterministic inference only
redocly generate-spec ./traffic.har

# Refine the hypothesis with AI
redocly generate-spec ./traffic.har --with-ai --ai-provider claude -o openapi.yaml
```

The `<traffic>` argument is a file or folder of recorded traffic.

> Supported formats: HAR, Kong, Nginx/Apache JSON, and NDJSON (auto-detected, or forced with `--traffic-format`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The supported formats are: 

- HAR
- Kong
- Nginx/Apache JSON
- NDJSON

Formats are auto-detected, or can be forced with `--traffic-format`.

```

Author: Applied, thanks.

The traffic parsing infrastructure is shared with the `drift` command.
The command generates OpenAPI 3.1 descriptions only.

## Deterministic inference

The baseline is derived from every exchange in the traffic:

- Identifier-like path segments (numeric, UUID, ULID, CUID, prefixed and opaque tokens) become named path parameters.
- Body schemas are merged across all observations.
  A property becomes optional as soon as one sample omits it.

> - Alternative body shapes for the same operation are preserved as `oneOf` variants instead of being collapsed, and values observed as `null` produce type unions such as `["string", "null"]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Alternative body shapes for the same operation are preserved as `oneOf` variants instead of being collapsed.
- Values observed as `null` produce type unions such as `["string", "null"]`.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

- Object shapes that repeat across the document are extracted into `components/schemas` and referenced with `$ref`.
  The same entity is recognized when it appears as a list item and as a single resource, with different `required` sets, or with near-identical properties (at least 75% shared, with compatible types).
  Components are named from the path entity, the enclosing property name, or `Error` for error responses.

>   A shape repeated only because its parent shape repeats stays inline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - The same entity is recognized when it appears as a list item and as a single resource, with different `required` sets, or with near-identical properties (at least 75% shared, with compatible types).
  - Components are named from the path entity, the enclosing property name, or `Error` for error responses.
  - A shape repeated only because its parent shape repeats stays inline.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

- Observed string values are analyzed conservatively: when every value of a property (or parameter) matches the same well-known pattern it gets a `format` (`uuid`, `date-time`, `date`, `email`, `uri`, `ipv4`).
  When a string only ever takes a small set of identifier-like values with enough repetition (at least 4 observations, at most 5 distinct values, each seen twice on average) it becomes an `enum`.
  Enums apply to body properties and query parameters.
  Path parameters and nullable unions get formats only.

>   Evidence is pooled across all operations a shared component was observed in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - When a string only ever takes a small set of identifier-like values with enough repetition it becomes an `enum`.
  To trigger this conversion, the command needs at least 4 observations, at most 5 distinct values, each seen twice on average.
  - Enums apply to body properties and query parameters.
  - Path parameters and nullable unions get formats only.
  - Evidence is pooled across all operations a shared component was observed in.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

- Responses that were never received (status `0` in HAR captures) are ignored.

## AI refinement

> The description is refined one operation at a time, so prompt and response stay small no matter how large the recorded traffic or the resulting description is.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The description is refined one operation at a time.
The prompt and response stay small regardless of the volume of recorded traffic or the resulting description's size.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

Each prompt carries a single operation from the baseline, the component schemas it references, the names of the other components (reserved against collisions), and a capped, shape-diverse sample of the real exchanges recorded for that operation (grouped by status and body shape, selected round-robin so every observed payload variant is represented).

> The AI is instructed to narrow types, add formats, enums, descriptions and examples, refine or add `components/schemas`, and model alternative payloads explicitly with `oneOf` (plus `discriminator`) and `allOf` composition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each prompt carries:
- a single operation from the baseline
- referenced component schemas
- names of the other components (reserved against collisions)
- a capped, shape-diverse sample of real exchanges recorded for that operation 

The sample of exchanges is grouped by status and body shape, selected round-robin to represent every observed payload variant.

The AI:
- narrows types
- adds formats, enums, descriptions and examples
- refines or adds `components/schemas`
- models alternative payloads explicitly with `oneOf` (plus `discriminator`) and `allOf` composition
```

Author: Applied via your later split suggestions for these paragraphs (the "Each prompt carries:" and "The AI is instructed to:" lists) in dcb7ff62.

> Up to `--ai-concurrency` operations (default 4) are refined in parallel, and every accepted refinement is merged back as it arrives, so operations prompted later see already-refined shared components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The number of operations refined in parallel is set in `--ai-concurrency`, 4 by default.
Every accepted refinement is merged back as it arrives.
Operations prompted later see already-refined shared components.
```

Author: Applied via your later version of this paragraph in dcb7ff62.

When two concurrent refinements touch the same shared component, the one merged last wins.

>   The final whole-document lint still guards the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

When two concurrent refinements touch the same shared component, the one merged last wins.
The final whole-document lint still guards the result.

```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

> Set `--ai-concurrency 1` to process operations strictly sequentially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To process operations strictly sequentially, set `--ai-concurrency 1`.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

  Components are named from the path entity, the enclosing property name, or `Error` for error responses.
  A shape repeated only because its parent shape repeats stays inline.
- Observed string values are analyzed conservatively: when every value of a property (or parameter) matches the same well-known pattern it gets a `format` (`uuid`, `date-time`, `date`, `email`, `uri`, `ipv4`).
  When a string only ever takes a small set of identifier-like values with enough repetition (at least 4 observations, at most 5 distinct values, each seen twice on average) it becomes an `enum`.
  Enums apply to body properties and query parameters.
  Path parameters and nullable unions get formats only.
  Evidence is pooled across all operations a shared component was observed in.
- Responses that were never received (status `0` in HAR captures) are ignored.

## AI refinement

The description is refined one operation at a time, so prompt and response stay small no matter how large the recorded traffic or the resulting description is.

> Each prompt carries a single operation from the baseline, the component schemas it references, the names of the other components (reserved against collisions), and a capped, shape-diverse sample of the real exchanges recorded for that operation (grouped by status and body shape, selected round-robin so every observed payload variant is represented).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each prompt carries:
- a single operation from the baseline
- component schemas it references
- names of other components (reserved against collisions)
- a capped, shape-diverse sample of the real exchanges recorded for that operation  

The sample of exchanges is grouped by status and body shape, selected round-robin to represent every observed payload variant.

```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

> The AI is instructed to narrow types, add formats, enums, descriptions and examples, refine or add `components/schemas`, and model alternative payloads explicitly with `oneOf` (plus `discriminator`) and `allOf` composition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AI is instructed to:
- narrow types
- add formats, enums, descriptions and examples
- refine or add `components/schemas`
- model alternative payloads explicitly with `oneOf` (plus `discriminator`) and `allOf` composition.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

> Up to `--ai-concurrency` operations (default 4) are refined in parallel, and every accepted refinement is merged back as it arrives, so operations prompted later see already-refined shared components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can set the number of operations refined in parallel using `--ai-concurrency`.
The default value is `4`.
Every accepted refinement is merged back as it arrives: operations prompted later see already-refined shared components.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

When two concurrent refinements touch the same shared component, the one merged last wins.
The final whole-document lint still guards the result.
Set `--ai-concurrency 1` to process operations strictly sequentially.
Progress is reported per operation as refinements complete.

The AI's answer is never trusted blindly.
A refined operation is only accepted when it:

- keeps the exact path template and method — the AI cannot invent, drop, or rename operations because only the requested operation is merged back
- keeps every response status code observed in the traffic
- keeps an `operationId`
- does not redefine reserved components (those used only by other operations)
- passes validation with the `spec` ruleset (checked against the description's full component set)

> An operation whose refinement is rejected keeps its deterministic baseline (reported with the reason), components no operation references anymore are pruned, and the final document is linted again as a whole.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An operation whose refinement is rejected keeps its deterministic baseline and the reason for rejection is reported).
Components that no operation references are pruned.
The final document is linted again as a whole.

```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62 (dropped the stray closing parenthesis after "reported"), thanks.

If refinement fails for every operation, the command falls back to the deterministic baseline.
Each provider call times out after 5 minutes.

> The acceptance lint is intentionally pinned to the `spec` ruleset and does not use the project's `redocly.yaml`: a stricter governance config would reject refinements for problems the baseline itself has, and a looser one could let structurally broken output through.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The acceptance lint is intentionally pinned to the `spec` ruleset and does not use the project's `redocly.yaml`.
A stricter governance config would reject refinements for problems the baseline itself has.
A looser one could let structurally broken output through.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

Lint the generated description with your own config afterward.

> **Warning:** `--with-ai` sends samples of the recorded traffic (URLs, query strings, request and response bodies) to the selected AI provider.

> > Make sure the traffic contains no secrets or personal data you are not allowed to share.

Reviewer 2: Should this be wrapped in a Markdoc admonition tag?

Author: This README ships with the package on GitHub/npm rather than the docs site, so a Markdoc admonition tag would render as literal text there. Keeping the plain blockquote for now — when the command graduates from experimental and gets a docs/@v2 page, that page should use the admonition tag.

## Options

| Option             | Description                                                                                           |
| ------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `--type`           | Target description type. Only `openapi` is supported.                                                 |
| `--traffic-format` | Traffic input format (`auto`, `har`, `kong`, `nginx-json`, `apache-json`, `ndjson`).                  |
| `--server`         | Server URL the traffic was captured against. Scopes which requests are considered and sets `servers`. |
| `--title`          | Title for the generated description.                                                                  |
| `--with-ai`        | Refine the inferred description with an AI provider.                                                  |
| `--ai-provider`    | `claude`, `codex`, or `cursor` (default `claude`).                                                    |
| `--ai-model`       | Model passed to the selected provider.                                                                |

> | `--ai-concurrency` | Number of operations refined in parallel (default `4`).                                               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `--ai-concurrency` | Number of operations refined in parallel. Default: `4`.                                               |
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

| `-o, --output`     | Write the result to a file instead of stdout.                                                         |

## AI providers

> Every provider CLI is spawned in an empty temporary directory, so project context the CLIs normally auto-load from the working directory (`CLAUDE.md`, `AGENTS.md`, `.cursor/rules`) never enters the prompts — it would slow every call down and could steer the refinement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Every provider CLI is spawned in an empty temporary directory.
The project context the CLIs normally auto-load from the working directory (`CLAUDE.md`, `AGENTS.md`, `.cursor/rules`) never enters the prompts.
Otherwise, it would slow every call down and could steer the refinement.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

- **`claude`** — runs the local `claude` CLI in headless mode (`claude -p`), with built-in tools, MCP servers, settings (hooks, skills, plugins), and session persistence disabled so every call is a plain completion.
  Because settings are not loaded, a model configured there does not apply: pass `--ai-model`, or the CLI's built-in default model is used.
- **`codex`** — runs the local `codex` CLI in non-interactive mode (`codex exec`) with MCP servers and `AGENTS.md` discovery disabled and a read-only sandbox.
  Other settings from `~/.codex/config.toml`, such as `model_reasoning_effort`, still apply.
- **`cursor`** — runs the local Cursor CLI in print mode: `cursor-agent -p`.
  The renamed `agent` binary is tried as a fallback).

All providers require the respective CLI to be installed and authenticated on the machine running the command.

## Performance for large APIs

> Total time is roughly the per-operation AI time multiplied by the number of operations and divided by `--ai-concurrency`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The total time is roughly the per-operation AI time multiplied by the number of operations and divided by `--ai-concurrency`.
```

Author: Applied in dcb7ff62, thanks.

- Object shapes that repeat across the document are extracted into `components/schemas` and referenced with `$ref`.
  The same entity is recognized when it appears as a list item and as a single resource, with different `required` sets, or with near-identical properties (at least 75% shared, with compatible types).
  Components are named from the path entity, the enclosing property name, or `Error` for error responses; a shape repeated only because its parent shape repeats stays inline.
- Observed string values are analyzed conservatively: when every value of a property (or parameter) matches the same well-known pattern it gets a `format` (`uuid`, `date-time`, `date`, `email`, `uri`, `ipv4`); when a string only ever takes a small set of identifier-like values with enough repetition (at least 4 observations, at most 5 distinct values, each seen twice on average) it becomes an `enum`.
  Enums apply to body properties and query parameters; path parameters and nullable unions get formats only.
  Evidence is pooled across all operations a shared component was observed in.

> - Responses that were never received (status `0` in HAR captures) are ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Identifier-like path segments (numeric, UUID, ULID, CUID, prefixed and opaque tokens) become named path parameters.
- Body schemas are merged across all observations.
  A property becomes optional as soon as one sample omits it.
- Alternative body shapes for the same operation are preserved as `oneOf` variants instead of being collapsed, and values observed as `null` produce type unions such as `["string", "null"]`.
- Object shapes that repeat across the document are extracted into `components/schemas` and referenced with `$ref`.
  The same entity is recognized when it appears as a list item and as a single resource, with different `required` sets, or with near-identical properties (at least 75% shared, with compatible types).
  Components are named from the path entity, the enclosing property name, or `Error` for error responses.
  A shape repeated only because its parent shape repeats stays inline.
- Observed string values are analyzed conservatively: when every value of a property (or parameter) matches the same well-known pattern it gets a `format` (`uuid`, `date-time`, `date`, `email`, `uri`, `ipv4`).
  When a string only ever takes a small set of identifier-like values with enough repetition (at least 4 observations, at most 5 distinct values, each seen twice on average) it becomes an `enum`.
  Enums apply to body properties and query parameters.
  Path parameters and nullable unions get formats only.
  Evidence is pooled across all operations a shared component was observed in.
- Responses that were never received (status `0` in HAR captures) are ignored.
```

## AI refinement

The description is refined one operation at a time, so prompt and response stay small no matter how large the recorded traffic or the resulting description is.
Each prompt carries a single operation from the baseline, the component schemas it references, the names of the other components (reserved against collisions), and a capped, shape-diverse sample of the real exchanges recorded for that operation (grouped by status and body shape, selected round-robin so every observed payload variant is represented).
The AI is instructed to narrow types, add formats, enums, descriptions and examples, refine or add `components/schemas`, and model alternative payloads explicitly with `oneOf` (plus `discriminator`) and `allOf` composition.

Up to `--ai-concurrency` operations (default 4) are refined in parallel, and every accepted refinement is merged back as it arrives, so operations prompted later see already-refined shared components.

> When two concurrent refinements touch the same shared component, the one merged last wins; the final whole-document lint still guards the result.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When two concurrent refinements touch the same shared component, the one merged last wins.
  The final whole-document lint still guards the result.
```

Set `--ai-concurrency 1` to process operations strictly sequentially.
Progress is reported per operation as refinements complete.

The AI's answer is never trusted blindly.
A refined operation is only accepted when it:

- keeps the exact path template and method — the AI cannot invent, drop, or rename operations because only the requested operation is merged back;
- keeps every response status code observed in the traffic;

> - passes validation with the `spec` ruleset (checked against the description's full component set).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- keeps the exact path template and method — the AI cannot invent, drop, or rename operations because only the requested operation is merged back
- keeps every response status code observed in the traffic
- passes validation with the `spec` ruleset (checked against the description's full component set)
```

| `--ai-concurrency` | Number of operations refined in parallel (default `4`).                                               |
| `-o, --output`     | Write the result to a file instead of stdout.                                                         |

## AI providers

Every provider CLI is spawned in an empty temporary directory, so project context the CLIs normally auto-load from the working directory (`CLAUDE.md`, `AGENTS.md`, `.cursor/rules`) never enters the prompts — it would slow every call down and could steer the refinement.

- **`claude`** — runs the local `claude` CLI in headless mode (`claude -p`), with built-in tools, MCP servers, settings (hooks, skills, plugins), and session persistence disabled so every call is a plain completion.
  Because settings are not loaded, a model configured there does not apply: pass `--ai-model`, or the CLI's built-in default model is used.
- **`codex`** — runs the local `codex` CLI in non-interactive mode (`codex exec`) with MCP servers and `AGENTS.md` discovery disabled and a read-only sandbox.
  Other settings from `~/.codex/config.toml`, such as `model_reasoning_effort`, still apply.

> - **`cursor`** — runs the local Cursor CLI in print mode (`cursor-agent -p`; the renamed `agent` binary is tried as a fallback).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **`cursor`** — runs the local Cursor CLI in print mode: `cursor-agent -p`.
  The renamed `agent` binary is tried as a fallback).
```

All providers require the respective CLI to be installed and authenticated on the machine running the command.

## Performance for large APIs

Total time is roughly the per-operation AI time multiplied by the number of operations and divided by `--ai-concurrency`.
For descriptions with many operations:

- Raise `--ai-concurrency` (for example to `12`) — calls are network-bound and the provider CLIs retry rate-limit responses themselves.

> - Pick a faster model with `--ai-model`; smaller models roughly halve the per-operation time compared to the largest ones at some cost in refinement depth.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Pick a faster model with `--ai-model`.
  Smaller models roughly halve the per-operation time compared to the largest ones at some cost in refinement depth.
```
